# NETCONF/YANG on Nexus: Part 1 - Learning to use the Cisco NXOS YANG Model

Did you know that a Nexus switch can be represented using one or more data structures?  More specifically, a Nexus switch's configuration and operational state can be represented in various data formats such as JSON and XML, but this data must adhere to the data models that the Nexus switch supports.  In this module, we'll walk through the various types of models supported and take a look at how we communicate and automate Nexus switches using data that adheres to those models!  Let's get started.

You should know by now that data modeling provides a means for defining the schema supported by devices, e.g. configuration and operational state syntax and semantics, and the most pervasive modeling language for networking devices is called YANG--we're focused on describing the different YANG models supported by Nexus in this module! 

Note that the Nexus switches have support for a native, Cisco NXOS specific YANG model and various OpenConfig YANG models. As you'll see in this module, the Cisco specific model is a single model that accounts for all features, but OpenConfig models are more concise in that they are purpose-built for specific features.

While we're only covering NETCONF and YANG models in module, you should also realize that from a programmabilty standpoint, this is independent from the NX-API CLI and NX-API Object Model APIs (although the object model API supports Cisco specific YANG model). For additional information refer to learning labs on those topics. 

From a hands-on perspective in this lab, you'll view and navigate the Cisco specific Nexus model and in Part 2, you'll continue to use this model building out a Layer 3 switch fabric, and finally in Part 3, you'll use OpenConfig YANG data models on Nexus switches.  Additionally, while utilizing XML data that adheres to those models, you'll configure Nexus switches using the NETCONF programmable interface.

## Prerequisites

The user has an understanding and knowledge of the following:
- Complete the [Introduction to YANG Data Modeling](https://learninglabs.cisco.com/modules/intro-device-level-interfaces/) Devnet learning lab
- Complete the [Introduction to the NETCONF Protocol](https://learninglabs.cisco.com/modules/intro-device-level-interfaces/) Devnet learning lab 
- Basic Python and Ansible
- Python's ncclient
- Installing and using packages on Linux
- BGP routing protocol

## Objectives

- Learn how to install and setup the proper device packages on Nexus switches to start using NETCONF/YANG.
- Learn how to use the XML representation of the YANG models to configure Nexus switches using NETCONF via the ncclient.
- Understand the difference between the Cisco NXOS YANG model and OpenConfig YANG models, both of which Nexus supports (after Part 1, Part 2, and Part 3).

**For an introduction to NETCONF, YANG, and ncclient please see the learning labs focused on these technologies**



## Preparing the Switches

**STOP:** You should ensure that the [NXOS Sandbox](https://devnetsandbox.cisco.com/RM/Diagram/Index/1e9b57ff-9e64-4c68-93e5-f0f0a8c6f22c?diagramType=Topology) lab is reserved before starting as it takes a few minutes to get started!

*The first lab in this module includes a detailed walkthrough of reserving the Sandbox if needed.*  

This lab is designed to be run from the DevBox included in the Sandbox.  You will connect to the DevBox via SSH and execute the lab through the terminal.  The SSH session can be done using the Guacamole Web Console, or directly SSHing to the server.  

> Note: Both options to connect require you are VPN'd to the Sandbox.

```bash
$ ssh root@10.10.20.20
Warning: Permanently added '10.10.20.20' (ECDSA) to the list of known hosts.
root@10.10.20.20's password: cisco123

Last login: Wed Dec  6 15:02:55 2017 from 10.10.20.7
Updating Sample Code Repo
Already up-to-date.

Activating Python 2.7.13 Virtual Environment
.
.
```

### Copying the Installation Packages to the Nexus Switches

In order to work with the data model, we will first need to install the necessary software on the devices. The software installation RPMs are available for download, for free, at
[the Cisco Artifactory](https://devhub.cisco.com/artifactory/open-nxos-agents/)
*Note: No CCO login required*

There are three types of RPM packages to be aware of:

- NX-OS Programmable Interface Infrastructure Components
- Common Model Components
- Agent Components

Let's take a look at each so you can better understand them.

The NX-OS Programmable Interface Infrastructure comprises of two Linux RPM packages:

- **mtx-infra** — This RPM is platform-independent.
- **mtx-device-model** — This RPM is platform-dependent and must be selected to match the installed NX-OS image at the time of Cisco Artifactory download.


Common Model component RPMs provides support for Openconfig and IETF defined models. In order to enable support for one or more desired Common Models, the associated Common Model component RPMs must be downloaded and installed. 

As with the Cisco specific model (**mtx-device-model**), Common Model components are also platform-dependent and must be selected to match the installed NX-OS image at the time of Cisco Artifactory download.  You'll install a given common model such as a OpenConfig (OC) BGP model should you want to use the OC model instead of the Cisco Nexus model.

Finally, three agent packages are available: NETCONF, RESTConf and gRPC. At least one agent must be installed in order to have access to the modeled NX-OS interface. For our lab, we will be working with the NETCONF agent exclusively.


Login to the devbox to download the necessary packages. Run the following ansible playbook from the `yang-prereqs` directory:

``` shell
(python2) [root@localhost sbx_nxos]# cd /root/sbx_nxos/learning_labs/yang/yang-prereqs/
(python2) [root@localhost yang-prereqs]# ansible-playbook get_rpms.yml
PLAY [ENSURE THAT THE NXOS RPMS ARE AVAILABLE] *********************************

TASK [setup] *******************************************************************
ok: [10.10.20.20]

TASK [CREATE THE NXOS RPMS DIRECTORY] ******************************************
changed: [10.10.20.20]

TASK [DOWNLOAD THE CISCO ARTIFACTORY RPMs] *************************************
changed: [10.10.20.20] => (item=https://devhub.cisco.com/artifactory/open-nxos-agents/7.0-3-I6-1/x86_64/mtx-device-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm)
changed: [10.10.20.20] => (item=https://devhub.cisco.com/artifactory/open-nxos-agents/7.0-3-I6-1/x86_64/mtx-infra-1.0.0-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm)
changed: [10.10.20.20] => (item=https://devhub.cisco.com/artifactory/open-nxos-agents/7.0-3-I6-1/x86_64/mtx-netconf-agent-1.0.1-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm)
changed: [10.10.20.20] => (item=https://devhub.cisco.com/artifactory/open-nxos-agents/7.0-3-I6-1/x86_64/mtx-openconfig-bgp-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705170158.x86_64.rpm)
changed: [10.10.20.20] => (item=https://devhub.cisco.com/artifactory/open-nxos-agents/7.0-3-I6-1/x86_64/mtx-openconfig-if-ip-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705170202.x86_64.rpm)
changed: [10.10.20.20] => (item=https://devhub.cisco.com/artifactory/open-nxos-agents/7.0-3-I6-1/x86_64/mtx-openconfig-interfaces-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705190423.x86_64.rpm)

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
10.10.20.20                : ok=3    changed=2    unreachable=0    failed=0   
```
This playbook creates a directory `/root/sbx_nxos/learning_labs/yang/nxos_rpms/` and downloads the required software.

Take a look by navigating within the devbox.

``` shell
(python2) [root@localhost ~]# cd /root/sbx_nxos/learning_labs/yang/nxos_rpms/
(python2) [root@localhost nxos_rpms]# 
(python2) [root@localhost nxos_rpms]# ls -l
total 64272
-rw-r--r--. 1 root root 15231416 May 19 23:21 mtx-device-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm
-rw-r--r--. 1 root root 10420941 May 19 23:22 mtx-infra-1.0.0-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm
-rw-r--r--. 1 root root  2923015 May 19 23:23 mtx-netconf-agent-1.0.1-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm
-rw-r--r--. 1 root root 21075904 May 24 19:17 mtx-openconfig-bgp-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705170158.x86_64.rpm
-rw-r--r--. 1 root root 10645230 May 24 19:17 mtx-openconfig-if-ip-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705170202.x86_64.rpm
-rw-r--r--. 1 root root  5505579 May 24 19:17 mtx-openconfig-interfaces-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705190423.x86_64.rpm
(python2) [root@localhost nxos_rpms]# 

```

Now from the devbox, log into **nx-osv9000-1** and **nx-osv9000-2** and copy the NETCONF agent and the programmable interface infrastructure packages.  

**Note:** 

*  nx-osv9000-1 -> `ssh cisco@172.16.30.101` 
*  nx-osv9000-2 -> `ssh cisco@172.16.30.102` 
*  nx-osv9000-3 -> `ssh cisco@172.16.30.103` 
*  nx-osv9000-4 -> `ssh cisco@172.16.30.104` 
*  Password: cisco

You'll be using SCP to copy the files from the devbox directly to each switch. 

*(Reminder: DevBox password is `cisco123`)*

``` shell

### Copy the programmable interface infrastructure packages:

nx-osv9000-1#copy scp://root@10.10.20.20/root/sbx_nxos/learning_labs/yang/nxos_rpms/mtx-device-7_0_3_I6_1.1.0.0-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm bootflash: vrf management

nx-osv9000-1#copy scp://root@10.10.20.20/root/sbx_nxos/learning_labs/yang/nxos_rpms/mtx-infra-1.0.0-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm bootflash: vrf management

# Copy the NETCONF agent package

nx-osv9000-1#copy scp://root@10.10.20.20/root/sbx_nxos/learning_labs/yang/nxos_rpms/mtx-netconf-agent-1.0.1-r1705191346.x86_64.rpm bootflash: vrf management

```

You now need to copy the same files over to **nx-osv9000-2**.

Now that the RPMs are copied over, let's install them.
